chapter 3 pi and FLATTENED pi (#5)
LeidongX/Leidong_Thesis: tex/chapters/chapter3.tex

% +--------------------------------------------------------------------+
% | Sample Chapter 3
% +--------------------------------------------------------------------+
\cleardoublepage

\chapter{Power Method and Flattened Power Method}

> This chapter contains a general description of power method and flattened power method and provide the algorithms of applying them on k-eigenvalue neutron transport problems.

Reviewer: provide should be provides

> All the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of a system matrix can be calculated by solving characteristic equation. 

Reviewer: "a characteristic equation" or "characteristic equations"

However, the computational cost can be extremely expensive for a large system.

Iterative algorithms solve the eigenvalue problem by producing sequences that converge to either the eigenvalues or the eigenvectors.
In common applications, the eigenvalue sequences and eigenvector sequences are expressed as sequences of similar matrices. 
Those sequences will converge to a triangular or diagonal form, which allow the eigenvalues to be read easily. 

Those iterative algorithms have been used for a variety of purposes and productions.

> This means certain algorithm might not be able to general systems, but only can be applied to hermitian or symmetric systems.

Reviewer: "This means certain algorithms might not be applicable to general systems"

On the other hand, the costs per iteration and convergence could also be different, which could be more than an order of magnitude sometimes. 

Some of those iterative algorithms can produce all the eigenpairs or eigenvalues. 

> However, as mentioned in last chapter, only the largest eigenvalue and corresponding eigenvector are interesting in the k-eigenvalue transport problem.

Reviewer: maybe "relevant" instead of "interesting"

> Although there are many iterative used for this type of eigenvalue problems, such as QR algorithm, Bisection method and Jacobi eigenvalue algorithm, traditional power iteration is the simplest method to determine the fundamental mode and corresponding eigenvalue.

Reviewer: "iterative methods" instead of "iterative"

This method goes by many names such as power iteration and Von Mises iteration.
Moreover, some of the more advanced eigenvalue algorithms are variations of the power iteration, for example, Arnoldi iteration which takes advantage of the whole Krylov subspace. 

\section{Methodology}

> Using same notation from Equation \ref{eq:keig}, we we first define $\mathbf{A} =  \mathbf{(I - DL^{-1}MS)}$ and $\mathbf{B} = \mathbf{DL^{-1}MF}$ for convenience.

Reviewer: "using the same" instead of "using same"   we is repeated twice and only needs to be there once

With these definitions, Equation \ref{eq:keig} may be rewritten as a general eigenvalue problem:
\begin{equation}
\mathbf{A} \mathbf{x} = \frac{1}{k} \mathbf{B} \mathbf{x} \, ,
\label{eq:eigenvalue}
\end{equation}
where $\mathbf{x}$ will be used to represent the flux or the fission rate in all future equations.
The eigenvalue is typically updated by fission rate.
At the time of the study, the in-house transport solver used the ratios of fluxes for the eigenvalue update.
However, the code has since been updated to use the ratio of fission densities, and found a negligible difference in results.

> First, power method start from a good assumption of eigenpairs, where the eigenvector is often normalized by norm equal to one.

Reviewer: "starts" instead of "start

> Then the $\mathbf{x}$ can be update by solving a typical $\mathbf{A} \mathbf{x} =\mathbf{b}$ problem, where $\mathbf{b}$ is a vector from applying the B operator and k value to previous $\mathbf{x}$.

Reviewer: "updated" instead of "update", "to the previous x"

> Note that the ratio between the new and old eigenvalues is equation to $\frac{||\mathbf{x}_{i}||}{||\mathbf{x}_{i-1}||}$, also, $\mathbf{x}$ need to be normalized before next iteration. 

Reviewer: "equal" instead of "equation", "needs" instead of "need", "the next iteration"

This process should be repeated until convergence criteria are met and produce the dominant eigenmodes at the steady state if the problem could converge.

And the full power method algorithm is summarized as follows:
\begin{enumerate}
  \item Assume $k_{(0)}$ and $\mathbf{x}_{(0)}$, where $||\mathbf{x}_{(0)}||=1$.
  \item Update $\mathbf{x}_{(i)} = \frac{1}{k_{(i-1)}} \mathbf{A}^{-1} \mathbf{B} \mathbf{x}_{(i-1)}$, where $(i)$ represents the eigen iteration.
  \item Update eigenvalue by  $k_{i} = k_{i-1} \frac{||\mathbf{x}_{i}||}{||\mathbf{x}_{i-1}||}$ and set  $\mathbf{x}_{(i)} =\frac{\mathbf{x}^{}_{i}}{||\mathbf{x}^{}_{i}||}$.
  \item Repeat steps 2 and 3 for $i = 1, 2, \ldots$ until $||\mathbf{x}^{}_{(i)} - \mathbf{x}^{}_{(i-1)}|| < \tau$ for some tolerance $\tau$.
\end{enumerate}

> Here the low index $i$ indicate the sequence number of iteration.

Reviewer: "indicates" instead of "indicate"

This numerical approach can be implemented as relatively simple codes.

\section{Convergence}

> Note that convergence is an important evaluation criteria of iterative method. 

Reviewer: "the iterative method"

In practice, the rate of convergence of the power method depends on the relative magnitudes of the leading eigenvalues. 

> In other words, the usefulness of the power method depends upon the ration $|\lambda_1|/|\lambda_0|$.

Reviewer: "ratio" instead of "ration"

\end{split}
\end{equation}
Repeated multiplications of $\mathbf{A}$ leads to
\begin{equation}
\begin{split}
  \mathbf{A}^n \mathbf{x}^{(0)} 
   &= \lambda^n_0 \left ( \mathbf{x}_0 + c_1 \left( \frac{\lambda_1}{\lambda_0} \right)^n \mathbf{x}_1 + c_2 \left ( \frac{\lambda_2}{\lambda_0} \right )^n \mathbf{x}_2 + \ldots \right ) \, ,
\end{split}
\end{equation}
which shows that if $|\lambda_0| > |\lambda_1|$, then $\mathbf{A}^n \mathbf{x}^{(0)}$ will tend toward the direction $\mathbf{x}_0$ at a rate governed by the dominance ratio $|\lambda_1|/|\lambda_0|$. 
Because $\lambda^n_0$ may grow without bound (or vanish), normalization is required during the iteration as is included in the algorithm above.

As long as the fundamental mode and its corresponding eigenvalue are real and the initial guess $\mathbf{x}^{(0)}$ is not perpendicular to the fundamental mode $\mathbf{x}_0$ (i.e., $\mathbf{x}^T_0\mathbf{x}^{(0)} \neq 0$), the power method will converge to the dominant eigenpair $(\mathbf{x}_0, \lambda_0)$.

\section{Computational Cost}

> The algorithm discussed above are based on the assumption that $\mathbf{A} =  \mathbf{(I - DL^{-1}MS)}$, which also requires that the system operator $\mathbf{A}$ can be output explicitly. 

Reviewer: "is" instead of "are"

In practice, we can rarely have the system matrices of the discretized multigroup neutron transport equation, meanwhile, directly inverse the large-scale matrices is significantly more expensive.
However, the inversion of the operator $\mathbf{A}$ is equivalent to solving the multigroup equations. 
Each iteration to achieve withingroup calculation $\mathbf{(I - DL^{-1}MS)}^{-1}$ may require many phase-space sweeps to converge the scattering source.

> Those $S_n$ sweeps built a inner iterative process, of course, contain a great number of transport sweeps. 

Reviewer: This sentence does not read very clearly to me.

The number of transport sweeps (applications of $\mathbf{L}^{-1}$) is a good measure for the total computational cost since one transport sweep is required for each update of the scattering source.

> To to distinguish it from power iterations, these iterations are called as inner iterations for transport k-eigenvalue problems.

Reviewer: "are called inner" instead of "are called as inner"

> In this way, this leads two nested iteration levels required of power method: the outer iteration(eigen iteration) and inner(source iteration).

Reviewer: "this leads to two"

\section{Flatten Power iteration}
Power method is implemented with many strategies to improve the overall efficiency, and one possible way is achieved by varying the level of precision of source iterations.
One way is to set the inner tolerance to be proportional to the current outer residual or some other measure of the current level of error in the outer iteration.
Another would be to fix the number of inner iterations for each outer iteration.

> Note that the scattering and fission sources is not completely converged in every outer iteration while either of the inner iteration strategies is used.

Reviewer: "sources are not"

\citep{gill_newtons_2011}

The outer iteration in full power method often requires fewer and fewer inner iterations to converge when it gets closed to the final solution, and, therefore, eventually use only one inner iteration to inverse the with-in group operator sufficiently.  

> This behavior lead to an important alternative often used in practice is the so-called {\it flattened} iteration (FPI), in which a single (space-angle-energy) transport sweep is performed for every power iteration.

Reviewer: "often used in practice, the so called"

The flattened power method converges the scattering and fission sources simultaneously.

The scattering matrix is moved to the right side of Equation \ref{eq:keig}, and, thus, step 2 from the full power iteration becomes 
\begin{equation}
 \mathbf{x}_{(i)} =  \mathbf{DL^{-1}M} (\mathbf{S} + \frac{1}{k} \mathbf{F})\mathbf{x}_{(i-1)}   \, .
 \label{eq:flatten}
\end{equation}
where F indicates a flattened operator, which only contain one inner iteration.

> In this formulation, one nested iteration level is eliminated, and it's only require one sweep over all the energy group when apply the operator on the flux from previous iteration,  

Reviewer: "and it only requires", "when applying", "the previous iteration."

> Compare to traditional full power iteration, the computationally cost of a single iteration in FPI in this form is obviously cheaper.

Reviewer: "the computational cost"

Although this scheme may require more outer-most iterations (i.e., updates of $k$), they often reduce the total cost of solving the transport equation (either in eigenvalue  or fixed-source form).\citep{gill_newtons_2011}

> Another great feature of this approach is that it can be implemented by limit the number of inner iteration to one, by this way, some power method code, could control the number of inner iterations used in each PI iteration, likely to achieve this numerical approach easily.  

Reviewer: "by limiting" "inner iterations"  "through this method" instead of "by this way"
"likely to achieve this numerical approach easily" does not read easily

\cleardoublepage

\chapter{The Power and Flattened-Power Methods}
\label{chapter:PM}

This chapter contains a general description of the power and flattened-power methods for solving $k$-eigenvalue neutron transport problems.
All the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of a system matrix can be calculated by solving the characteristic equation
\begin{equation}
\text{det}(\mathbf{A} -\lambda \mathbf{I} ) = 0 \, ,
\label{eq:characteristic}
\end{equation}
where $\mathbf{I}$ represents the identity matrix.
However, the computational cost of solving this equation directly can be extremely high for large systems. 

Iterative algorithms solve the eigenvalue problem by producing sequences that converge to either the eigenvalues or the eigenvectors.

> In many schemes, the eigenvalues and eigenvectors are reveal through the application of sequences of similar matrices. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In many schemes, the eigenvalues and eigenvectors are revealed through the application of sequences of matrices that are similar to $\mathbf{A}$. 
```

> In many schemes, the eigenvalues and eigenvectors are reveal through the application of sequences of similar matrices. 

Reviewer 2: *citation needed.  Perhaps give an example scheme name?

> In common applications, the eigenvalue sequences and eigenvector sequences are expressed as sequences of similar matrices. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In many schemes, the eigenvalues and eigenvectors are reveal through the application of sequences of similar matrices. 
```

> Eventually, these sequences will converge to a triangular or diagonal form, which allows the eigenvalues to be read easily. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Eventually, these sequences converge to a triangular or diagonal form, which allows the eigenvalues to be read easily. 
```

> Those sequences will converge to a triangular or diagonal form, which allow the eigenvalues to be read easily. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Eventually, these sequences will converge to a triangular or diagonal form, which allows the eigenvalues to be read easily. 
```

> Those iterative algorithms have been used for a variety of purposes and productions.

Reviewer 2: *Citation needed

This means certain algorithm might not be applicable to general systems, but can only be applied to hermitian or symmetric systems.

> On the other hand, the costs per iteration and convergence could also be different, which could be more than an order of magnitude sometimes. 

Reviewer 2: It is much easier to talk about specific methods as opposed to the performance of general methods.  This is too abstract to be useful.  I suggest mentioning that the power method is in the class of iterative methods, and name other similar methods.

> Some of those iterative algorithms can produce all the eigenpairs or eigenvalues. 

Reviewer 2: Name specific methods.  Perhaps cite the Demmel textbook on applied numerical linear algebra.

Reviewer 2: Alternatively, begin with the specific purpose of an algorithm that only needs to find the largest eigenvalue and jump into describing the power method.

However, as mentioned in last chapter, only the largest eigenvalue and corresponding eigenvector are relevant in the k-eigenvalue transport problem.

> Although there are many iterative methods used for this type of eigenvalue problems, such as QR algorithm, Bisection method and Jacobi eigenvalue algorithm, traditional power iteration is the simplest method to determine the fundamental mode and corresponding eigenvalue.

Reviewer 2: I would add a citation for these methods

This method goes by many names such as power iteration and Von Mises iteration\cite{mises1929praktische}.

> Moreover, some of the more advanced eigenvalue algorithms are variations of the power iteration, for example, Arnoldi iteration \cite{arnoldi1951principle} which takes advantage of the whole Krylov subspace. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Moreover, some of the more advanced eigenvalue algorithms are variations of the power iteration, for example, Arnoldi iteration \cite{arnoldi1951principle}, which takes advantage of the whole Krylov subspace. 
```

\section{Methodology}
Using the same notation from Equation \ref{eq:keig}, we first define $\mathbf{A} =  \mathbf{(I - DL^{-1}MS)}$ and $\mathbf{B} = \mathbf{DL^{-1}MF}$ for convenience.

> With these definitions, Equation \ref{eq:keig} may be rewritten as a general eigenvalue problem:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With these definitions, Equation \ref{eq:keig} may be rewritten as a general eigenvalue problem, i.e.,
```

\begin{equation}
\mathbf{A} \mathbf{x} = \frac{1}{k} \mathbf{B} \mathbf{x} \, ,
\label{eq:eigenvalue}
\end{equation}
where $\mathbf{x}$ will be used to represent the flux or the fission rate in all future equations.
The eigenvalue is typically updated by fission rate.

> At the time of the study, the in-house transport solver used the ratios of fluxes for the eigenvalue update.

Reviewer 2: This discussion may be better after the description of the power method.  I suggest talking about how the method works for a general eigenvalue problem, then present the specific case of your application.

However, the code has since been updated to use the ratio of fission densities, and found a negligible difference in results.

> First, power method starts from a good assumption of eigenpairs, where the eigenvector is often normalized by norm equal to one.

Reviewer 2: What is a good assumption? $\mathbf{x} = \mathbf{1}$? $\mathbf{x} = \mathbf{b}$? something else?

> Then the $\mathbf{x}$ can be updated by solving a typical $\mathbf{A} \mathbf{x} =\mathbf{b}$ problem, where $\mathbf{b}$ is a vector from applying the B operator and k value to the previous $\mathbf{x}$.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Then, the $\mathbf{x}$ can be updated by solving a typical $\mathbf{A} \mathbf{x} =\mathbf{b}$ problem, where $\mathbf{b}=\frac{1}{k}\mathbf{B}\mathbf{x}$ is a vector.
```

Note that the ratio between the new and old eigenvalues is equal to $\frac{||\mathbf{x}_{i}||}{||\mathbf{x}_{i-1}||}$, also, $\mathbf{x}$ needs to be normalized before the next iteration. 

> This process should be repeated until convergence criteria are met and produce the dominant eigenmodes at the steady state if the problem could converge.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This process is repeated until convergence criteria are met, which produces the dominant eigenmodes at the steady state.
```

Reviewer 2: You should probably also mention what happens if the method doesn't converge or under what circumstances it will not converge.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> And the full power method algorithm is summarized as follows:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The algorithm for the full power method is as follows:
```

\begin{enumerate}
  \item Assume $k_{(0)}$ and $\mathbf{x}_{(0)}$, where $||\mathbf{x}_{(0)}||=1$.
  \item Update $\mathbf{x}_{(i)} = \frac{1}{k_{(i-1)}} \mathbf{A}^{-1} \mathbf{B} \mathbf{x}_{(i-1)}$, where $(i)$ represents the eigen iteration.
  \item Update eigenvalue by  $k_{i} = k_{i-1} \frac{||\mathbf{x}_{i}||}{||\mathbf{x}_{i-1}||}$ and set  $\mathbf{x}_{(i)} =\frac{\mathbf{x}^{}_{i}}{||\mathbf{x}^{}_{i}||}$.
  \item Repeat steps 2 and 3 for $i = 1, 2, \ldots$ until $||\mathbf{x}^{}_{(i)} - \mathbf{x}^{}_{(i-1)}|| < \tau$ for some tolerance $\tau$.
\end{enumerate}
Here the low index $i$ indicates the sequence number of iteration.

> This numerical approach can be implemented as relatively simple codes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This approach can be simply implemented in the programming language of choice.
```

\section{Convergence}
Note that convergence is an important evaluation criteria of the iterative method. 
In practice, the rate of convergence of the power method depends on the relative magnitudes of the leading eigenvalues. 

> In other words, the usefulness of the power method depends upon the ratio $|\lambda_1|/|\lambda_0|$.

Reviewer 2: I believe this is called the dominance ratio of the matrix and is related to the stability of the method.  You may wish to discuss this further.

The initial guess can be expressed as a sum of the weighted eigenvectors of $\mathbf{A}$, i.e.,
\begin{equation}
\begin{split}
  \mathbf{x}^{(0)} 
     &=  c_0' \mathbf{x}_0 + c_1' \mathbf{x}_1 + c_2'  \mathbf{x}_2 \ldots \,  \\
     &=  c_0' \left (\mathbf{x}_0 + \frac{c_1'}{c_0'} \mathbf{x}_1 + \frac{c_2'}{c_0'} \mathbf{x}_2 \ldots  \right ) \\
     &=  c_0' \left (\mathbf{x}_0 + c_1 \mathbf{x}_1 + c_2 \mathbf{x}_2 \ldots  \right )\, .         
\end{split}
\end{equation}

> Because normalization of an eigenvector is arbitrary, let $c_0' = 1$.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Without loss of generality, let $c_0' = 1$.
```

> Then, applying operator $\mathbf{A}$ by this initial guess leads to 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Application of operator $\mathbf{A}$ leads to 
```

\begin{equation}
\begin{split}
  \mathbf{A} \mathbf{x}^{(0)} 
   &=  \mathbf{A} \mathbf{x}_0  +  c_1 \mathbf{A} \mathbf{x}_1 + c_2 \mathbf{A} \mathbf{x}_2 + \ldots \\
   &= \lambda_0 \mathbf{x}_0 + c_1 \lambda_1 \mathbf{x}_1 + c_2 \lambda_2 \mathbf{x}_2 + \ldots \\ 
   &= \lambda_0 \left ( \mathbf{x}_0 + c_1 \frac{\lambda_1}{\lambda_0} \mathbf{x}_1 + c_2 \frac{\lambda_2}{\lambda_0} \mathbf{x}_2 + \ldots \right ) \, .
\end{split}
\end{equation}

> Repeated multiplications of $\mathbf{A}$ leads to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Repeated applications of operator $\mathbf{A}$ leads to
```

\begin{equation}
\begin{split}
  \mathbf{A}^n \mathbf{x}^{(0)} 
   &= \lambda^n_0 \left ( \mathbf{x}_0 + c_1 \left( \frac{\lambda_1}{\lambda_0} \right)^n \mathbf{x}_1 + c_2 \left ( \frac{\lambda_2}{\lambda_0} \right )^n \mathbf{x}_2 + \ldots \right ) \, ,
\end{split}
\end{equation}

> which shows that if $|\lambda_0| > |\lambda_1|$, then $\mathbf{A}^n \mathbf{x}^{(0)}$ will tend toward the direction $\mathbf{x}_0$ at a rate governed by the dominance ratio $|\lambda_1|/|\lambda_0|$. 

Reviewer 2: There is not a conditional for the \lambdas.  They are arbitrary, thus you just state that they are sorted, i.e. \lambda_0 is the largest. The power method pulls out the largest eigenvalue for the same reason that the infinity norm is equal to the largest element.  I'm not sure that fact is made clear in this section. (A^nx)^{1/n} = (\sum_i^\infty Ax_i)^{1/n}=Ax_0

Because $\lambda^n_0$ may grow without bound (or vanish), normalization is required during the iteration as is included in the algorithm above.

As long as the fundamental mode and its corresponding eigenvalue are real and the initial guess $\mathbf{x}^{(0)}$ is not perpendicular to the fundamental mode $\mathbf{x}_0$ (i.e., $\mathbf{x}^T_0\mathbf{x}^{(0)} \neq 0$), the power method will converge to the dominant eigenpair $(\mathbf{x}_0, \lambda_0)$.

> \section{Computational Cost}

Reviewer 2: This is not the computational cost of a generalized power method, but rather for the application of solving the discrete ordinates form of the neutron transport equation.  You may wish to improve the section heading to reflect this.  I also recommend writing an introduction for each section that explains the goals for the section at hand.

> The algorithm discussed above is based on the assumption that $\mathbf{A} =  \mathbf{(I - DL^{-1}MS)}$, which also requires that the system operator $\mathbf{A}$ can be output explicitly. 

Reviewer 2: I don't think this statement is true.  Your algorithm only requires that you can apply A to x or that you can solve the system Ax=b.  You aren't making any claims about how the system is solved.

In practice, we can rarely have the system matrices of the discretized multigroup neutron transport equation, meanwhile, directly inverse the large-scale matrices is significantly more expensive.
However, the inversion of the operator $\mathbf{A}$ is equivalent to solving the multigroup equations. 

> Each iteration to achieve withingroup calculation $\mathbf{(I - DL^{-1}MS)}^{-1}$ may require many phase-space sweeps to converge the scattering source.

Reviewer 2: This doesn't make sense

> Updating the source term is equivalent to an inner iterative process, of course, contain a great number of $S_n$ transport sweeps. 

Reviewer 2: I think you need to draw out the iterative scheme here.  The explanation for the multiple types of iteration leaves something to be desired.

% +--------------------------------------------------------------------+
% | Sample Chapter 3
% +--------------------------------------------------------------------+
\cleardoublepage

\chapter{Power Method and Flattened Power Method}

All the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of a single matrix can be calculated by solving characteristic equation.
However, the computational cost can be extremely expensive for a large system. 

> For a lot of realistic engineering problem, only the largest eigenvalue and corresponding eigenvector are interesting, which called dominant eigenmodes or dominant eigenpairs.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For a lot of realistic engineering problems, only the largest eigenvalue and corresponding eigenvector are interesting, and these are often referred to as the dominant eigenmode or dominant eigenpair.
```

> And the dominant eigenpair satisfies $Ax_0 = \lambda_0 x_0$.

Reviewer 3: I'm not sure this is needed.

> The ratio of neutron gains to losses of neutron transport or diffusion problem shown at last chapter is typical example of chasing dominant eigenmodes.

Reviewer 3: You should identify both the eigenmode (i.e., the steady-state, critical flux) and the eigenvalue (the ratio of gains to losses, i.e., keff) separately to connect this section to the last chapter.

Power iteration is the simplest method to approximate the fundamental mode and corresponding eigenvalue. 

> The iteration method is also known as the Von Mises iteration. 

Reviewer 3: I'm not familiar with Von Mises iteration.  If this is true, you need a reference.

> This method is efficient in solving diagonally dominant sparse matrix which is common in linear systems.

Reviewer 3: Why does diagonal dominance matter?
